When I was starting out in rare books at Dawson's Bookshop in Los Angeles, Norman Strauss was starting out in advertising.
And so we have known each other since about 1930.
Really?
And as I say, he was starting advertising.
And we kept in touch.
I used to sell him books mostly by mail.
And then finally he was
promoted over 80 vice presidents into the presidency of the world's biggest advertising agency.
And he went back to New York.
And in the meantime, the Free Library of Philadelphia was picking up or getting a rare book librarian for their collection, which was a marvelous collection.
So I went back to Philadelphia.
And there aren't too many rare book specialists.
So I used to teach a seminar in rare books at Columbia, and I would go up one day a week in the fall semester, and I would take my students, I wouldn't have more than nine or so, over to see Norman.
Because the students could get to the libraries, and they could get to the rare bookshops, but they couldn't get to the private collective unless somebody took them.
So I used to take them there.
So I knew Norman then, you see.
But he was happy to meet with the students.
He loved it.
A lot of collectors might not have agreed to do that.
Well, Norman is different.
For one thing, one of the sorrows in the back of his mind is the fact that he never went to college.
He has taught in universities.
He has been the regent's professor here at the University of California.
He holds several doctorates, but he never got there.
And so he has the greatest sympathy for people to get an education, and he has been
wonderfully generous with the Gleason Library Associates, even more generous with the Bancroft Library.
And there are various places.
When I was the rare book librarian in Philadelphia, he gave us his
wonderful collection of presidential letters.
This was where, Philly?
Philadelphia.
Which institution?
The Free Library of Philadelphia.
I've interviewed Edwin Wolfe, by the way, as part of this research.
Oh, yes.
Yes, he's quite a guy.
He's quite a guy.
Yes.
No, the Free Library is the public library.
The department that I had occupied the whole third floor of that building, if you've been in there.
I have.
Well, Philadelphia is a wonderful book city.
I have never seen so many beautiful books so badly treated in my life.
They're trying to repair things.
Yeah.
But that's correct.
Ed talked about that, as a matter of fact.
Yeah, Ed takes things very enthusiastically, and he gets started one time with, oh, some sort of
You know, that you could piece the books together for a while.
Of course, in about five years, they disintegrated again, but he tried.
Now, why did Mr. Strauss, what was his connection with Philadelphia?
Well, I was there.
And then also, he met the director of the library, Emerson Greenaway.
He sounds like such a generous and giving man.
He is.
He meets people.
Tell me a little bit about how this happens, because I hear so many stories.
He meets somebody, he likes them, and the next thing you know, he's giving a bequest of books.
Well, as I say, he has the greatest sympathy for getting an education.
He has always been a...
browser and bookshops.
Now, the way that this museum started was that when he was about 24, browsing in a bookshop, and he can't remember now which one, he came across a copy of the Silverado Squatters, printed by John Henry Nash.
Well, he has always been very much interested in fine printing.
We have the book out here on exhibit.
He bought the book for the sake of the typography, but naturally he read it.
And immediately became very excited.
As soon as he could, he came up to Mount St.
Helena to the site of the bunkhouse, got interested in Stevenson, and started collecting it.
And that is how the museum started.
But he has had many collections.
Stevenson is just one, I gather.
Yes, Stevenson is just one, but really his major interest, you see.
And that's why I set up a foundation to establish and support this museum.
We are a private foundation.
We have nothing to do with the city, state, or federal government.
We are supported by Norman Strauss.
Now, tell me a little bit.
You do join the public library, though.
Well, we have nothing to do with the public library.
The public library is the Library of St.
Helena.
We are the Violema Foundation, the private foundation.
What do we call it?
What's Violema?
Violema, which was Stevenson's home in Samoa.
Oh, that's nice.
And Mr. Strauss, for years, nine and a half years, we had the museum over in the hatchery, a lovely old stone building.
which Mr. Strauss owned for a time.
Being forward-looking, he felt that the hatchery would presumably always be in private hands, and he said, suppose 50 years from now, a future owner says, get out.
What do you do?
Well, the library was just starting a campaign to put up a building, and so he suggested that the Silver Audi Museum would join forces.
We would pay
for our own building here.
Now, technically we are a wing, but actually, as you see, we are a separate building.
This was built according to our specifications.
We paid considerably more than our share.
It was a great big advantage.
The library wouldn't have gone up as fast as it did if it hadn't been for the Silverado Museum, but that is how we happened to be
And what year was this, that this building was?
We opened up in 79.
I see.
And when, in fact, was the Silverado Museum and Library established?
We are the Silverado Museum.
We're not a library.
That's right.
We have plenty of books, but technically we are a museum.
What year were you established?
We opened up for business the 14th of December of 69.
And moved into these quarters in 1979.
That's right.
Actually, we had been nine and a half years in the other building.
Okay.
Are these artifacts and books and papers, were these all gathered by Mr. Strauss himself?
And me, yes.
And himself.
You see, we have been in existence for 20 years.
When we opened up, Norman gave, as a starter, his wonderful collection of Stevenson, 800 items.
All splendid things like the Child's Garden of Verses that Stevenson gave to his wife and signed, you know, from her subject, the author, and things of that kind.
Stevenson's own copy of his first book.
And so he gave the 800 items.
Today we have over 8,000.
In this building, obviously, just a fraction of these are on exhibit.
That's right.
Well, a lot of them are a bit flat.
For instance, we have over a thousand photographs, largely from the Stevenson family.
And then letters.
We've got a wealth of letters from Fanny and from Stevenson.
How about manuscript material?
We have some of that.
more or less sheets here and there.
For instance, we have two leaves from Jekyll and Hyde, and various manuscripts.
But as I say, so much of the material you don't see.
When did your formal relationship with Mrs. Fels begin?
You mean on this museum?
As I say, I've known them for, well, I guess it's going on 60 years now.
I came out with the Manuscript Society on an expedition I had to San Francisco, and he handled their itinerary.
We were up here one day in St.
Helena, and when he was saying goodbye to me, he said, when are you coming back to California to stay?
And my family had all died in the meantime.
When somebody finds something interesting for me to do.
And Norman was on the telephone a month later.
So I gave the Free Library of Philadelphia five months' notice.
Five months.
And I came out here and officially took over in August of 1970.
And I have been here ever since.
And are you enjoying California, might I ask?
Well, I first came to California in 1924.
lived in Southern California.
And, of course, it was while I was at Dawson's Bookshop in Los Angeles that I met Norman.
We interviewed Glenn Dawson, by the way, Monday morning.
Well, you'll see a picture of Glenn up here, and a picture of Muir, and then here is their father.
So these are my three bosses, Emerson Greenaway, Norman Strauss, and Ernest Dawson.
Oh, it was on the wall.
You've been a book woman all your life, then I gather.
I started in my hometown was Leadville, Colorado, and I went to work in the library there as a junior in high school.
And I wonder when the attraction to rare books began.
I always had it.
Really?
When I was there in Leadville, somebody
Of course, in the mining camp in the early days, you know, you got everybody.
Somebody who had been a book collector had given 17th, 18th century, and 19th century.
They're the comic histories of Greece and Rome and England, for instance.
And I was going around the library there, hunting up these old books, Poets of Oshim and various other books.
early books that I found there, and getting them into a cupboard with a saucer of water and a sponge to combat the dryness, because in Colorado, at 10,000 feet, you had a very dry atmosphere.
So always I have been interested in rare books.
My mother was from Boston on her home with Stone, Massachusetts.
No, we live out in Grafton, which is close to Worcester.
Oh, is that right?
Very close to Stone.
Oh, fine.
Thanks a lot, Al.
You've done nobly.
He sits there and doesn't seem to do anything.
He sells books and makes sense.
He'll bring me back a $20 bill.
A little bit later, another $20.
Let me turn off the light here for just a minute so that we won't have people.
Maybe 15 or 20 more minutes and...
And if there are any other questions, I can call you.
Yes, well, you can.
As I say, I came out here, and I've been working here ever since.
And probably Father Bill told you that Norman is a victim of Parkinson's disease.
He said it would be quite impossible to talk to him, and I appreciate that.
But he also said that you probably know everything there is to know.
I think you probably could talk to him a little.
He's got a crew, a wonderful crew of nurses with him all the time, 24 hours a day.
He has people with him.
And there is one who is a marvel.
She's a therapist and a crack nurse, and she is determined that he is not.
He's enamored of the Davenport, and she is not going to let him lie on the Davenport and grow roots.
The latest thing, they went up to Ashland to the Shakespeare Festival.
They saw a couple of plays up there.
She got him down to the Moscow Circus in San Francisco.
He went down to, he got a notion he wanted to see Le Miserable, and I understand he stuck it out for an hour and a half.
So it might be that Dell could get him to talk.
We are flying back to Massachusetts tomorrow, and I don't think that this is something we could do on the television.
Does he talk on the telephone at all?
He does, but there are times he may be a little confused.
And then also, it seems one of the horrid things about Parkinson's disease is that it affects the vocal cords.
I cannot understand them a lot of the time.
I think, really, that for the purposes of my book, it's going to be quite satisfactory to talk to you, I think.
Well, as I say, he has given... Because his actions speak... What he has done speaks... He has always been a collector.
I am a little interested in... Now, you say he is not formally educated, certainly on the university level.
He educated himself.
He's haunted bookshops.
Always.
And when I would be staying up there with the Strausses, I always thought it was very interesting.
Charlotte and I would be reading mystery stories, and Norman would be reading something that would do him good.
Always.
And you say he always was a collector then?
All sorts of things.
I wonder at what point he became enamored of rare books of first editions and... Oh, right from the beginning, I think.
You never know where he'd take off to.
Somebody came in one time and said, I'm so sorry that Mr. Strauss isn't around, because I'd like to tell him how much I appreciate the collection on the Panama Canal that he gave to the Stanford Public Library.
I've known him all these years, and this was the first I ever knew that he had any interest in.
Do you have a list or an idea of what collections he could give, just to make it every interesting to list those collections, or what he contributed to libraries?
office, or at least what used to be his office.
I think they could... Where is that?
Well, I would write to Elizabeth Bayer, who is the... She is the treasurer of the... She's on our board of trustees, and she handles all of his business affairs.
And she is here?
She is in St.
Helena, yes.
Yeah, well, I think I have to know...
really just to demonstrate how generous he has been to indicate the scope of the gifts.
Well, there are so many all over the country.
Every once in a while I hear about some place that I never knew that he had any particular interest.
And Elizabeth Speer would have this?
She could tell you that people would.
And I'd just write her in care of?
Well, you can see what is her post office box.
Well, you can write her 409, the museum's box, and you'll get her.
Okay.
And she could tell you, because all sorts of people, now Colgate, for instance, he gave them things.
And this is so.
Canford, I think, gave things.
As I say, the free library, he gave them.
Well, I was told yesterday that Santa Clara was building a library, and he said, I will help you make a great library.
And so he gave them something.
Well, Santa Cruz.
Santa Cruz, yes.
Santa Cruz.
Now, he gave his collection of, oh dear, who's the French Revolution?
Carlisle.
Oh, really?
He gave his collection, which is a very notable collection of Carlisle.
That went to Santa Cruz.
Now, clearly, he built great collections.
But he never became so attached to them that he felt he had to keep them.
That's rather interesting.
And, of course, having worked with book collectors all my life, I find it rather interesting that he's got what I would almost describe as a sort of a ruthless quality in collecting.
Now, he would keep his, he could tell you every book he had.
He could tell you when he bought it, where he bought it, what he paid for it.
And he kept his inventory at a certain figure for the sake of insurance.
And that meant that if he saw something that he wanted, he would give up something else.
Now, most collectors, you know, they'd sooner give an arm or a leg.
But there was one time I sold him the finest Nara book that I ever saw.
Spell, please.
N-A-R-A.
They were beautiful Japanese manuscripts, beautifully illustrated, beautifully illuminated.
This was a three-volume one, and we had a good many of them in Dawson's bookshop.
I saw a good many of them.
What was the figure that he had for inventory?
I had no idea.
I never asked him.
I didn't want to know.
I'm just surprised he didn't build a bigger library, you know.
Do you think that maybe— Well, his library was in his home, you see.
And this is something else again.
This is the museum.
There at his home, Scarifor, he had a 90-foot gallery there.
That was where?
That was here in St.
Helena.
A 90-foot gallery.
A 90-foot book gallery.
Wow.
He built this house in 1970, and he said when he had it, he said, if I have it, he said, I've always wanted a big house.
And he said, if I only have it for a year, I'll have had it.
Really?
And for about six years, he had it, and he and his wife just had a wonderful time.
And then things started to fall to pieces.
The last trip that they went,
to Europe, I am convinced that he had a stroke then, and he was just miserable.
And they cut their trip short ten days to come home, and when they phoned they were coming.
I had to tell them that when they got home, they would find that sixty-five acres of their property was burned over.
No buildings, fortunately, taken over.
Sixty-five?
How large is the property?
Oh, I can't tell you.
It was how many acres he had.
Oh, he was always buying things, yes.
He was picking up things.
And then, you see, he paid for all of the things that we got as well.
But after that, Charlotte said, coming back, that he was confused.
And she'd say, you know, now you stay right here with the luggage.
Don't you move and I'll get somebody to help you.
And that's the way they got home.
And she was busy coaching him for a while.
Every once in a while, he'd be confused.
All of a sudden, she had a stroke that put her in bed in a wheelchair, took away her speech, left her mind.
She could tell what was going on.
And he says he looks at her painting out there.
He says he'll never forget the pleading way that she'd look at him, trying to get him to understand.
So she died in 82.
And how old is Mr. Stroess now?
He will be 84 in November.
And he moved out here?
I mean, he obviously must have lived in New York all these years.
Well, he lived in New York for about 15 years.
Just 15 years?
Yeah.
He was out here.
Well, he was here on the West Coast, and then he was in Detroit when he moved into the presidency.
Where is he from?
He's from Olympia, Washington.
When I was coming out here, one of the people there at the New York Public Library, she said,
Oh, she said, you're going to have a dream employer.
She said, he's so warm-hearted and cordial for a New Yorker.
I said, I can tell you the answer to that, he isn't a New Yorker.
That's the reason.
But you said he was ruthless, ruthless in the sense of getting what he wanted.
Well, no, I mean in collecting.
If he saw something, he would sell something else.
And that's what happened to the Nara book.
I asked, you know, one time I asked about it.
He never said anything, but later I found out that there was a manuscript David McGee had, and he decided he wanted that, so away went the Nara book.
He sold or he gave?
Did he do both?
Well, both.
In this instance, he was trading with a dealer.
I see.
And that was the way that he managed.
He clearly believes, though, that
many of the collections that he has formed belong in institutions and should not go back into the private collecting sector, shall we say?
That's kind of unusual.
Yes, he's given, but as I say, the collections, his big collections that he's given, you'll find mostly in the Bancroft and Gleason and Santa Cruz.
to Mr. Strauss and his late wife.
Did they have any children?
Did they have a family?
She had three children.
She was a widow when he married her, and he is very devoted to his stepchildren.
He adopted them all legally, and they come around to see him.
One of them is in Connecticut.
She was the editor of the American Kennel Gazette,
She judges dog shows, and she's a very competent editor.
The middle one is Stanley Holt, whose headquarters are in Tokyo.
And then the youngest one is a daughter, and I think their headquarters are in St.
Louis now.
Her husband has a big automobile agency that covers, I think, several states.
And they come and go.
They come and visit him.
Now, the passion for Steve Stevenson is the one collection he decided to keep, not for himself, but in his own museum.
Well, yes.
Well, of course, the other collections are being kept also, the ones that... And now some of them he sells.
I think most of his incanabula, for instance, were sold.
And incanabula, too?
Oh, yes.
And one of the things, interestingly enough, that he just loves, and I think he still has it,
is Thomas Bird Molger.
He just loves those.
And another thing that he is still hanging onto are fine bindings, modern fine bindings.
He likes, for instance, to get the sheets from some book that appeals to him, get six copies, give the six sheets to six different binders, and tell them to do just whatever the book says to them.
And he will, I've had exhibits here showing six copies of the same book.
Could you think of a title offhand?
And it's not necessary, but you could just think of something where he might have done that.
It's kind of interesting.
Oh, it's... It's not necessary.
I should know him.
I should remember him.
The Silverado Journal was one.
The Silverado Episode, which he did himself.
The Child's Garden of Verses.
The Passion of Pirates.
Now that, you see, is on Thomas Byrd Mulcher.
Very, very fond of him.
One World of Sam Meek.
That was another one.
That's funny.
That he had, now you can see here, the different binders that he had.
They came from England, Germany, Belgium.
His wife was a binder for a time.
This was an exhibit of contemporary commissioned bindings, if it so was.
Exactly.
Now, that came out in 81.
I put on that exhibit then.
But he still, I think, is keeping his binders.
Does he come in here often?
He used to, but he doesn't now very much.
Now I'll get after him pretty soon and say, I've got a new exhibit of the Treasure Island, and the nurse will bring him down.
Often they see the chance to go shopping at the grocery store, and they park him, you see, and we can show him a few things.
When we went down to the Bancroft Library a while ago, we had
I guess you knew that Jim Hart?
I did, yes.
This is what he was here.
A brilliant mind, I'm told.
Oh, there he is.
Is this Mr. Strauss down here?
Yes, that's Norman.
Here's a very good photograph of him here.
And here's Jim Hart, and this is Jim Hart also.
And we wanted, as I say, we went down there and had lunch.
And right there in the rare book department of the Bancroft Library and Jim Hart had gotten the best box lunch I ever had.
It was just delicious.
And they trotted out the things that they had bought recently with the money that Norman had given them.
and the nurse was keeping an eye on things we stayed there just about an hour but he actually climbed upstairs there is a room there that that is the norman and charlotte strauss room and well should be because it's full of the things that he has given you spent and i really won't check up too much well it's all right you don't i don't have any date right now so you're all right but you spent your life
you're observing book people.
Do you have any idea what it is that drives people to become so passionate about the acquisition of books?
Well, possession, I think.
Now, there are some people that are just as ardent in collecting.
I used to be interested there at Dawson's, you know.
They'd say, well, poor so-and-so is gone.
I guess it
It comes to all of us, and we'll miss one of them.
Do you know what's going on in Duke's books?
That happened over and over again.
I think it probably continues to happen.
But somebody asked me to write a little article about Arthur Rackham and what I knew about him.
And there at Gossens, we found out that we had two collectors, two women, that were
ardently collecting Rackham, and they were bewailing the fact that there was no bibliography.
Well, we introduced the two of them and said, why don't you do it?
And that was how the Latimer-Haskell bibliography came into existence.
These are two women named Latimer and Haskell?
Sarah Briggs Latimer and Grace Clark Haskell.
Grace?
Haskell, H-A-S-K-E-L-L.
Well, what's really good is because so many, you hear this myth that women don't collect, you know.
Oh, they did.
There was Mrs. Taylor there in Colorado Springs.
I think she had, oh, I think she had all four fullies of Shakespeare.
I'm not sure.
Really?
But I knew her.
She used to come into Dawson's, and she'd say, this is Miss Schaefer.
Miss Schaefer is a native of Leadville.
I have to laugh every time I think of anybody from Leadville.
Well, they weren't so stupid in the mining camp.
You know, in a mining camp, you get everybody.
But anyway, these two women, we introduced them to each other.
That's a great story.
They were simply wonderful.
You never saw two people that worked together as happily as they did.
Here they were, each collecting, and they would defer to each other.
I never saw anything like it.
They were just dream people to work with.
We never had any problem about them.
We'd say, well, here's such and such that's just come in, and they would decide which one would take it.
Was that one of the publications from Dawson's bookstore, did they send?
No, they didn't.
It was Sutton House that did it.
And poor Sally and Mrs. Haskell, as far as I know, didn't get one penny out of all of their work.
Sutton House is English, I think, right?
No, he was an American.
Really?
Oh, yes.
Now, this was 1936 that this happened.
Were these affluent women?
Did you say?
No.
And, of course, in those days, you know, money went farther, and they both were well-to-do, and they collected and made this wonderful, which
It has been in three editions now.
The latest edition is 87.
And they were both Los Angeles area women?
One was Los Angeles and the other was Al Jadino, which of course is close.
But they were collecting independently and didn't know of each other's existence?
To start with until we introduced them.
And this was the Ed Dawson's?
Ed Dawson.
And as I say, I never saw two such people that worked so well.
And Mrs. Haskell decided that she would defer to Sally Latimer so that her name came first on the title page.
And the two of them built up wonderful collections.
And back about 1958, Mrs. Haskell, by that time I was in Philadelphia, she decided to
sell her collection, and so I bought the collection for Philadelphia, for the Free Library of Philadelphia.
So it came back, assembled on the west coast, came back to the east coast, and Sally sold her collection to Columbia.
Wonderful story.
And so they both came back, and later Rackham's daughter came over,
and saw both of the collections.
When she came down to Philadelphia, we had an enlarged portrait of her father that we had up on the pillar, and she said, so wonderful to come in.
And here he was, just the way she remembered him.
If you worked at Josh's, did you know the Countess at all?
Did you ever have any dealings with Doheny, the Countess Doheny?
I certainly did.
Is there anything you can share about her?
Wonderful.
She was a wonderful person.
Yes, I used to have lunch with her.
And they gave a lunch for me before I decided I'd cash in on my GI Bill of Rights and go down to Mexico and study for a while.
And so she gave a letter, she gave a luncheon for me.
And there was a lovely big card at each table in an envelope.
a wonderful handkerchief in it, and a card.
And as I started to open it, Lucille Miller, her librarian, said, that's quiet, that's private.
So I waited until I was alone and opened it.
Here is a check for $100.
It said that each month that you are in Mexico, you will get one of these checks, and I'll pray for you, too.
That was the countess.
And she didn't take the Countess so seriously after she was maiden.
It was the first papal Countess in the United States.
Somebody called up and said, well, how should we address it?
Well, by Mrs. Doheny, of course.
I wish she had wonderful taste in books, didn't she?
She was marvelous.
And, of course, a lot of people used to get the sneering here and there, you know, with just money.
Well, they found out now.
Well... With her...
And did she ever know them?
You see, she said that nothing was to be done to her books until she had been dead for 25 years.
Well, when the archbishop found out that it was appraised of 20 million, you can imagine how happy he was.
And they got busy right away.
There were the seven auctions.
And they got not 20 million, they got 41 million.
No, I have the catalogs.
They're right here.
Did you know Bradley Martin at all?
Yes, slightly.
I didn't know him so well, but I'd see him at some of the meetings, yes.
Yes, I didn't know him.
You don't have to answer this question, but I'm so impressed by the breadth of experience that you've had.
Do you mind telling me how old you are, if you don't want to?
Well, I can't dodge it very well.
A year ago, the museum put on a birthday party for me to celebrate my 85th birthday.
I was 86 on the 24th of April.
Wow.
And how—is this a 40-hour job for you that you—?
Well, it's four hours in the afternoon, and then, of course, there are always the extra times that
that come here and there, and I am pretty much running it because Norman isn't able to.
The trustees would do anything that I wanted, I think.
The one person, you see, that I depended on so much who was the rare book specialist was Jim Hart.
Jim was gone.
And we felt that all of us were older, you know, and we wanted to get somebody a little bit younger.
Well, there's this very
energetic person.
She did a very fine life of Fanny Stevenson, which unfortunately we've never been able to publish it.
Eleanor McIntyre, as I say, younger than any of the rest of us in her fifties.
She's the one that had cancer.
She's gone.
I'm so overwhelmed by all the information.
Nice.
Congratulations, really.
You said GI Bill.
Were you in the service?
Yes, I was in the Air Corps for two years.
I was in Dutch New Guinea in the Philippines.
And that was a very interesting experience.
And the Philippines when, during World War II?
Yes.
Yes, I was there at the time that the Japs folded up.
What did you do?
Well, they called it shipment control.
What I did was keeping track of
of radar and radio communication that came into the theater.
I worked with the manifest of cargo planes and ships, and I kept records of what material we had coming into the theater, and it was the case of just needing to be accurate.
There'd be an SCR-620, and that would be a ground radar set.
And then there'd be something else with just as many letters and numbers, and those would be resistors, probably, something like that.
It's just so remarkable, this gentleman is just, I mean, he's just so wonderful.
Oh, Norman?
Well, he is a wonderful person, and I've been sort of an extension of the family.
They celebrated their, I think it was their
31st wedding anniversary, and Pat, the oldest daughter, said, oh, I said, well, my family's been swingers from way back.
They're celebrating their 31st wedding anniversary.
Of course, I am 50 now.
When they celebrated, I was the only person at the party that wasn't related by birth or marriage.
I've been very, very lucky.
He has been very, very good to me.
He and Charlotte, I thought the world of him.
They both were wonderful people.
He's been very, very generous to people.
And he decided that he would have this museum, and he had this one young man that was one of his students there at Santa Cruz who helped him start in, helped set up the university, I mean the museum.
And he was his provisional curator for five weeks before the Army got him.
That was Steve Correll.
I don't know if he, or I mean Corrie.
Well, he was the librarian of the Gleason Library.
That's right.
His father mentioned him yesterday.
What did he say about him?
Did he say how he lost?
He didn't, but I remember him.
He mentioned his name several times in the course of the discussion, with how they were getting their mandate to go out and build a library.
Well, Steve has AIDS.
Oh.
I had heard that, as a matter of fact.
Had you?
Yeah.
Well, I saw him.
I was just simply horrified to, to... Did you see the tall fellow there?
The very tall young mustache?
Yes, he had.
They took this picture.
You can see where things are starting there, you see.
I heard he's really quite a whiz.
I mean, he's a terrific book man.
Well, he was a worker.
Now, this is the way he looked 20 years ago.
And let's see, this is 1983.
I was horrified when I went to the Gleason Library dinner.
I thought he looked just terrible, and I didn't see how he could look any worse, and then I saw him at the memorial service for
Jim Hart, and he looked infinitely worse.
And I think the poor thing just goes crawling over the library.
Father Bill says everybody there is very supportive of him.
One final question.
What's your dog's name, by the way?
Oh, that is Stevie.
Stevie.
Stevie is the third assistant curator.
And Stevie is what kind of dog?
I think mostly Lhasa Apso.
I don't know.
Well, the vet was showing me.
They said that for 700 years they were trained as watchdogs for the Tibetan nobles.
I said, well, we're a little bit short on Tibetan nobles.
Stevie.
Oh, Stevie.
Nice dog.
He's got a beautiful baby.
Very, very sweet.
Just, I guess, one last question and then we'll leave you.
Just an evaluation of
I guess I'd just like a final comment on Mr. Strauss as a bookman.
What separates him from the other book people you've known?
Well, persistence.
And as I say, any time he reads anything, at least it used to be that way, it was something that was informative that would help.
He just has, I guess, this thirst for education.
And he has bought...
according to his interests.
And his interests, as I say, he started out with Thomas Byrd Mulder, and then he picked up a good collection in Cannabula.
He had a very nice collection of illuminated manuscripts, and every Christmas time we would put in an exhibit
We'd forget about Stevenson.
We'd put in an exhibit of illuminated manuscripts.
And the last few years, each time I would be having a desperate time, I would pick up a few of the things that I had collected myself at Dawson's.
But it used to be that I would borrow about eighteen items from them.
The last time it was five items.
And, of course, it used to be that every time Jim Hart came up, something always stuck to him.
He was a widower for a number of years, and then he married a very charming woman who was a trustee of the Bancroft, and they came up here.
I never saw two happier people in my life.
He came up for something.
I said, well, did Connie come with him?
He said, oh, no, there wasn't room.
I said, I had pictures of him departing with maybe an Egyptian papyrus sticking out of the car window.
You said you collect.
You're a collector.
No, I don't collect anything.
It was just, most of the things that I use to piece out here are individual leaves, you know, manuscript leaves.
You see, I used to teach.
the history of books and printing I taught at Columbia, and I had taught for the extension of the University of California, and Immaculate Heart, and my old library school I taught that.
So I had just little bits and pieces, you know, and I have one incannabulum, but I could bring that out to show it's in contemporary binding, I could show what that was like, and so I was just piecing out
He was teaching aides, I gather, is what you're saying.
Well, yes.
And they were really more than teaching aides, I guess, but I just picked up everything that I could to piece out, and I don't know what I'll have this next Christmas.
It's hard to say, but he had a wonderful collection.
And more and more especially, he had two Ethiopian manuscripts.
And they were marvelous.
The color's just the same, you know.
And I think any time anybody ever saw one of the Ethiopian manuscripts, they'd never forget it.
And they went down to the Bancroft.
There was a nice 13th century biblia that I loved dearly.
Jim got that, too.
Now what happens?
Jim comes up and does he say to Mr. Strauss, gee, how does something like that happen, I wonder?
Well, I have never been around when Jim was in action.
But as I say, every time he'd go up there, something would stick to him.
And there was one time he came up, and I called up Norman.
Norman didn't feel like seeing him.
And I about fainted, and I think Jim about fainted, because he never realized, I guess, that there'd ever be a time that Norman wouldn't see him.
He just sounds like such a giving man.
Well, he is.
He can't say no to a good cause.
Well, he never let his heart run away with his hand.
He would figure that what he was giving was
They're going to just the right place.
And if he did, did he make stipulations that the libraries had to keep the collections together, or did he just give it and allow them to do with it?
Does he stipulate that the materials can never be deaccessioned?
I have no idea what he'd do.
I've never heard that.
That's kind of interesting, I wonder.
You bet, for the time being, they won't be deaccessioned.
I'm sure.
And everybody at the memorial service for Jim Hart, more than one of the speakers mentioned these droughts.
One of the things that he did for the Bancroft,
or for the university was to establish a chair of, I presume, literature.
I'm not quite sure, but it was for Jim Hart.
It was an honor of Jim Hart, and Jim Hart... He's a philanthropist, really, isn't he?
He is.
With books.
Well, do you think that there is a lot of... Does everyone know where the remaining, where the remainder of the library goes?
Has that been... Are people still wondering whether or not they may get... Well, he has given away quite a bit of it.
But I think he still has his ideas about some of the things that he is still keeping.
But I'm sure others have their fingers crossed and their breath held.
I don't know that they do so much.
I think that they know that he knows pretty well where things are going.
And of course, by and large, I would say the Bancroft, first of all.
Gleeson and Santa Cruz, I think.
But he has given things to other places.
As I say, he gave to the Free Library of Philadelphia.
You mentioned Cordell.
And then, to show you the sort of person he is, he gave the presidential letters, and he gave money to continue to buy.
Which presidential letters were these?
They had letters from many presidents?
Well, yes.
The presidents of the United States.
Starting in with George Washington and coming down to Richard Nixon.
And he gave these to whom?
He gave it to the Free Library, to the Rare Book Department of the Free Library.
And as I say, gave money to continue more, which is something, when you're on the receiving end, you get a collection and you keep wishing to heaven that they give you a little to keep it up.
But Norman did.
Have there been any books or articles written about him that I could make reference to that you could think of?
Norman?
Yes.
There was a, I guess you'd call it a book, it was a typescript, that J. Walter Thompson did at the time of his retirement.
I wonder if I could get a copy of that from J. Walter Thompson.
Well, I'd try.
I have a copy of it.
If I can't, is this something I could arrange to Xerox, do you think?
I'll try J. Walter Thompson.
Try J. Walter Thompson.
I'm sure.
And it's a series of articles written by various people.
He had Ducheness, who was in the East, and he had me in the West.
And various people knew him as just starting out.
And it was a very—it gave you all sorts of ideas.
I'll go to work on that Monday morning, and if I can't get it, I'll call you back, okay?
Maybe you could get a Xerox or something.
Well, I found—and strangely enough, he never paid any attention to that, as far as I know.
No, I never heard him mention it.
And another thing that's always interested me is that I never hear anything about his advertising career.
You'd think, you know, that you'd hear him mention experiences and so on.
Maybe once in a long while something, but in general, that's just, that was one phase of his life.
The books you think were number one in his life?
Outside of the family, of course.
Well, I think, I think that the, the books were really the major.
And as I say, he collected, for instance, he, he collected satin glass, and he collected, uh, Amari, uh,
China and so on.
He was a collector.
He just collected anything that appealed to him.
Fine arts?
Yes, and he was very much interested in modern art.
He got quite a lot of art that he had there at J. Walter Thompson.
I think he's got a Picasso there.
What else has he got?
Does he have a name for the house he lives in?
He hasn't named this one.
Now, the one he wanted to get the site that he wanted, so he bought Glass Mountain.
He bought a whole mountain?
He bought Glass Mountain, so-called because of the obsidian that's there.
It was a source of arrows for the Indians, so he bought Glass Mountain.
Because he wanted the site that was at the top of the mountain.
And he named it S-K-E-R-R-Y-V-O-R-E.
That was the name of a famous lighthouse that Stevenson's ancestors put up.
It was on the north coast of Scotland.
When Stevenson had a home, the first home that he and Fanny had in Bournemouth, they named that Scary Four.
And poor Scary Four got bombed off the map in the Second World War.
But he has this as Scary Four.
The match folders used to have the name Scary Four on it.
And he just loved that.
But the house that he's got now is a pleasant house, but he's never, never given it a name.
I think we were—I think he was waiting for us to make various suggestions and see what appealed to him.
Did he sell Scary War?
He sold Scary War, and Scary War was bought by the Trine Carrels, who are Southern Home.
Very interesting young couple.
I think they married when they were nineteen.
They started, and White Zinfandel was what set them on.
I had some of the photographs.
He sent down a lot of photographs that were around when they were moving down.
And so I asked Mrs. Trimcaro if she would like to have them.
She came up.
I was sort of hoping she'd invite me to come up and see the house, although in a way I think maybe I don't want to see it.
Because I know it's totally, totally different.
But the one nice thing about it was that for about six years, they had a whale of a good time, and he just loved the house.
It was a great, great big house.
And as I say, the book gallery was 90 feet long, and there was a great big master bedroom, and then a guest room.
and a great big dining room, and just one extra bedroom.
They were smart.
You know, out here we find that we have friends and relatives that we haven't heard of for 20 and 30 years, and they suddenly are seized with a desire to visit us.
That's wonderful.
I think we're going to let this... I'll see.
There are a couple more pictures of Norman, I think.
Sweetie, sweetie, thank you.
We're talking now, but you might just tell us who you're talking about.
Oh, about Mike Curling.
Well, he was a postal clerk.
He worked there at the post office, and during the Depression, you see, he had a steady job, and he was able to buy books.
He used to pay us partly in stamps.
The shipping clerk would tell him what denominations we wanted, and he just
bought things and bought things.
And I remember there was one poor customer that came out.
He was very, very ill.
He had a lot of books that we had put up on the shelves that we were going to send back to Gloversville, New York, where he came from.
And one of the books that he bought, I think, was the Keats.
Mike was absolutely livid when he found out, because he had wanted that book.
He said he hoped he'd die.
The man did.
He said that.
And when the lawyers released all of these books, as I say, we had them up on the tops of some of our bookcases there, Mike climbed right up.
I said, I should think that book would burn your hands.
But he wanted, and as I say, he meant it.
And he would buy books from us.
They would be wrapped up.
I think a lot of them were wrapped up when the Dawson's got them later.
And then, instead of using them, he wasn't going to wear out his good books.
He'd go to the library to read the books.
That's amazing.
What gets me is he made no provision for his collection.
He died and then it was just... Well, he was going to take it with him.
And then after he died, Glenn found out that he had, I think, three sisters.
This was news to us all.
We never had heard about that.
And one of them was, I think, an arrest, told them badly in need of money.
And I think Glenn used to keep fighting the county of Los Angeles.
You see, he'd made no provision, so the county stepped in and grabbed them.
And then they found out that there were some heirs, only the poor heirs didn't have any chance to get them.
at the time.
What do you think possessed and drove this man?
Well, there is a mania.
There was a man like that in the 18th century.
They nicknamed him Tom Folio, and he kept buying and buying just as Mike did.
I think they said he finally was sleeping in the passageway because he'd filled up all of the books.
This is the postal work?
No, this was Tom Folio.
Was he fictional or was he real?
He was real.
Just as Mike was real.
I have to check this guy out, because I don't know about him.
And I guess that it was just about impossible to get through his house that Mike had.
But he used to come in, he used to be in the Dawson's, oh, at least once a week, actually.
Glenn said he used to prefer to work nights and weekends so he could have the days to go to the bookstores and pay attention to his collection.
That was it.
That was the one thing that he... That's a great story.
We're going to let you go, Ms.
Frazier, and we can't thank you enough for everything.
Well, I don't mind, you know, when people are interested.
It's so important.
I just couldn't imagine having Nick write a book without mention of this marvelous man.
Well, as I say, he was a wonderful person, and he made all of his money himself.
He's just a genius.
I'd say perfect attention to detail.
and a wonderful capacity for taking pains.
I'll tell you that you're a wonderful person, too, though.
In fact, do you mind if I take your picture over here?
Would you object?
Well, it's all over the place, and always wrapped up.
He'd take them home, and then he wouldn't use them.
They were being taken care of.
So this is my dear woman.
It is a pleasure that I send to you as a gift at the Robert Louis Stevenson desk, which stood in the library at V-A-I-L-I-N.
Now that's by Lima, you see.
That was Stevenson's home in Samoa.
On the island of U-P-O-L-U, Samoa.
I suggest that you paste this letter under the lid of the old desk as a certificate of authenticity.
This piece of furniture has always had a peculiar interest for me as it played a large part in my lonely childhood.
There were no other children in the Valima household so that I had to invent games for myself and furniture took on personalities.
Isn't this wonderful?
This desk stood in the library upstairs off Stevenson's study.
Here in a dark room filled with books to the ceiling and piled in mountains all over the floor, I would play games during the rainy season when we would be driven indoors for days at a time.
This old desk became my companion, and it was very useful for sometimes by child magic I made it a castle or a fort or a humble cottage.
But my greatest achievement was making it the poop deck of the HMS Victory, Lord Nelson's flagship.
I not only enacted the whole battle of Trafalgar, but I played all the parts, from the French admirals, snipers from the fighting tufts, wonderful, to Lord Nelson himself.
I also played Captain Hardy, and I died most beautifully in my own arms.
as I was both Nelson and Hardy.
I was the lone actor of this great performance, except for Stevenson, who would glance in through the open door with an approving twinkle.
I saw this desk when it first arrived with over 30 great packing cases lined with heavy zinc.
We had to get the services of the A-R-M-C-U-R-E-R, arm curer of the H-M-S-C-U-R-A-C-O-A to bring his giant cutters
The Kura Kasoa was stationed at APIA, A-P-I-A, for nine months, and the officers and midshipmen were considered a part of the Alima family.
The packing cases were opened on the tennis courts in front of the big house, and our friends, the naval officers, were soon soiled and black in their white uniforms, a sight to behold as they lifted up busts.
They were O'Don, Statouette, Sergeant, and Hogarths.
Wow.
Silver and all the household effects of 17...